---
title: "Ugh"
date: 2024-03-24
---

#### 13:46 ET

Finally figured out yesterday's bug.
It was caused by what I thought was a clever alternative to global mutable state.
Not so clever after all!

The exercise was to determine which face of an animated cube received a mouse click.
I tried to keep track of the cube's rotation angle by passing it as an argument to `tick`, which indirectly calls itself
(through a call to `requestAnimationFrame`).
That part worked fine - `tick` was able to animate the cube very smoothly.
However the click handler had no way of getting access to that value.
I was calling it with the same intial angle argument - 0 - as I used to call `tick`, but of course that was a separate parameter
in a separate call stack. The two parameters had the same name, but no mechanism for keeping themselves in sync.

tl;dr I replaced the parameter with a global variable. It's a `val` not a `var`, which is forbidden by the sbt-tpolecat plugin,
but a `val gCurrentAngle = Array.ofDim[Float](1)`.
Yes, an array with only one element.
The best I can say about it is, it works.

This made me question my reasons for starting this project in the first place. If I'm going to use global mutable state anyway,
is Scala.js even worthwhile? I've learned about WebGL which was one of my goals, but another was to use that API in a functional
way, and I cannot say I've succeeded in that respect. I only have six more exercises before I'm done with the book and it is
very tempting to just keep using global mutable state for one more day so I can cross the finish line.
Right now I'm not sure what I'm going to do. I guess it's time for a break.
